tests/qml/README.md, before:

#### General notes, tips, etc.

* See the github workflow for steps to build, not much to it, just make sure you have the right qmake call.
* You don't need to rerun `make` inbetween changes to `tst_*.qml` files.
* I needed to make a property alias at a top level object to reference more nested things in the
 tests. There may be a better way where we're not cluttering up production code because of
 testing needs.

It can be a struggle to get the thing you want to import imported.
Don't struggle alone, ask for help.
Hopefully it's just figuring out the right combination of:
  * the .qrc files under `/src/ui`
  * the `qmldir`s
  * the RESOURCSE in `qml.pro`
  * the engine imports in `main.cpp`

Use `export QML_IMPORT_TRACE=1` before running your tests to get extra helpful informaiton.

As an example, under `/src/ui` there is a `ui.qrc`. That file lists the prefix as `ui` and points to a qmldir file `src/ui/qmldir`. The qmldir file lists `Main` and points to `src/ui/main.qml`. In `qml.pro` I have `...src/ui.qrc` as a `RESOURCE`; in `main.cpp` I import `engine->addImportPath("qrc:///");` because that pulls in the qmldir `src/ui/qmldir`. Lastly I can then do `import ui 0.1` in my `test_mainWindow.qml` and I can make a `Main` window.

Commit message:

Re-org code into main and helper cleanly

tests/qml/README.md, after:

## General notes, tips, etc.

See the github workflow for steps to build, not much to it, just make sure you have the right qmake call.

You don't need to rerun `make` inbetween changes to `tst_*.qml` files.

I needed to make a property alias at a top level object to reference more nested things in the tests. There may be a better way where we're not cluttering up production code because of testing needs.

#### Setup order

The order in which things are setup is important.

The SettingsHolder is made in `main.cpp` so that there is an instance available for everything else to use.

Ths SettingsHolder must be instantiated for the FeatureList to be able to initialize, and the FeatureList must be initialized before WhatsNewModel can be created.

#### QML imports / organization

It can be a struggle to get the thing you want to import imported.
Don't struggle alone, ask for help.
Hopefully it's just figuring out the right combination of:
  * the .qrc files under `/src/ui`
  * the `qmldir`s
  * the RESOURCSE in `qml.pro`
  * the engine imports in `main.cpp`

Use `export QML_IMPORT_TRACE=1` before running your tests to get extra helpful informaiton.

As an example, under `/src/ui` there is a `ui.qrc`. That file lists the prefix as `ui` and points to a qmldir file `src/ui/qmldir`. The qmldir file lists `Main` and points to `src/ui/main.qml`. In `qml.pro` I have `...src/ui.qrc` as a `RESOURCE`; in `main.cpp` I import `engine->addImportPath("qrc:///");` because that pulls in the qmldir `src/ui/qmldir`. Lastly I can then do `import ui 0.1` in my `test_mainWindow.qml` and I can make a `Main` window.
