src/adjust/adjust.md, before:

# Adjust data collection

This document contains the list of data collected by the adjust.sdk framework on mobile.
Currently these fields are sent:

- adid: main adjust generated identifier
- android_uuid: internal adjust identifier
- app_token: What identifies one adjust app from another
- att_status: determing apple ATT status
- attribution_deeplink: attributing to deeplink-based engagements
- bundle_id: apple universal linking, some partner requests, general troubleshooting
- created_at: the creation data of the adjustSDK database
- device_type: to determine if it's request is a tablet or phone
- environment: production or sandbox (so test data vs live data)
- event token: distinguishes what that event is in adjust (is it a purchase, or a signup for your app)
- google_play_instant: denotes if the ad unit was Google Play Instant https://developer.android.com/topic/google-play-instant
- gps_adid: primary advertising id on google android
- idfv
- needs response details: sdk <> backend communication
- os_name: tell us whether it's android, ios, or web
- os_version
- package name: same as bundle id
- referrer / referrer_api: Google Play Store referrer - more info on this here (https://help.adjust.com/en/article/get-started-android-sdk#set-up-install-referrer)
- reftag / reference tag: adjust click id
- sent_t: package sent date/time
- source: determines the how the install was attributed ie: install_referrer, iap, deeplink, apple_ads
- tracking enabled: LAT flag, legacy OS's will still have this value.
- zone offset: part of the created_at timestamp

Some other fields are replaced with dummy values. For the list, see the
`denyList` vector in adjustfiltering.cpp

Commit message:

Adding the attribution_token in the adjust filtering allow list

src/adjust/adjust.md, after:

# Adjust data collection

This document contains the list of data collected by the adjust.sdk framework on mobile.
Currently these fields are sent:

- adid: main adjust generated identifier
- android_uuid: internal adjust identifier
- app_token: What identifies one adjust app from another
- att_status: determing apple ATT status
- attribution_deeplink: attributing to deeplink-based engagements
- attribution_token: attribution token of the Apple Search Ads
- bundle_id: apple universal linking, some partner requests, general troubleshooting
- created_at: the creation data of the adjustSDK database
- device_type: to determine if it's request is a tablet or phone
- environment: production or sandbox (so test data vs live data)
- event token: distinguishes what that event is in adjust (is it a purchase, or a signup for your app)
- google_play_instant: denotes if the ad unit was Google Play Instant https://developer.android.com/topic/google-play-instant
- gps_adid: primary advertising id on google android
- idfv
- needs response details: sdk <> backend communication
- os_name: tell us whether it's android, ios, or web
- os_version
- package name: same as bundle id
- referrer / referrer_api: Google Play Store referrer - more info on this here (https://help.adjust.com/en/article/get-started-android-sdk#set-up-install-referrer)
- reftag / reference tag: adjust click id
- sent_t: package sent date/time
- source: determines the how the install was attributed ie: install_referrer, iap, deeplink, apple_ads
- tracking enabled: LAT flag, legacy OS's will still have this value.
- zone offset: part of the created_at timestamp

Some other fields are replaced with dummy values. For the list, see the
`denyList` vector in adjustfiltering.cpp
