docs/index.mdx, before:

---
title: Mozilla VPN
sidebar_label: Overview
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /
hide_table_of_contents: false
---



_One tap to privacy
Surf, stream, game, and get work done while maintaining your privacy online.
Whether you’re traveling, using public WiFi, or simply looking for more online
security, we will always put your privacy first._

See: https://vpn.mozilla.org

export const Grid = ({children}) => (
  <span
    style={{
      display: "grid",
      gridTemplateColumns: "2fr 1fr",
      gridColumnGap: "20px",
    }}>
    {children}
  </span>
);
export const Preview = ({children}) =>(<iframe
    src="https://firefox-ci-tc.services.mozilla.com/api/index/v1/task/mozillavpn.v2.mozilla-vpn-client.branch.main.latest.build.wasm/artifacts/public%2Fbuild%2Fembedded.html"
    style={{
      width: "390px",
      height: "670px",
      border: "15px solid black",
      borderRadius: "20px",
      gridColumn: 2,
      gridRow: 1,
      gridRowEnd: "auto",
      gridRowEnd: 1000,
    }}
  />
);

<Grid>
  <div>
  ## Getting Involved
  We encourage you to participate in this open source project. We love Pull
  Requests, Bug Reports, ideas, (security) code reviews, or any other kind of
  positive contribution.

  Before you attempt to make a contribution please read the [Community
  Participation
  Guidelines](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/about/governance/policies/participation/).

  Here are some useful links to start:

  * [View open
    issues](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/issues)
  * [View open pull
    requests](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/pulls)
  * [File an
    issue](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/issues/new/choose)
  * [File a security
    issue](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/enter_bug.cgi?product=Mozilla%20VPN)
  * Join the [matrix
    channel](https://chat.mozilla.org/#/room/#mozilla-vpn:mozilla.org)
  * [View the wiki](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/wiki)
  * [View the support
    docs](https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/products/firefox-private-network-vpn)
  * Localization happens on
    [Pontoon](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/projects/mozilla-vpn-client/).
  </div>
  <Preview></Preview>

</Grid>



## Building the Client

Moved here - [Dev-Setup](Building/index.md)

### Pre-commit formatting hook

If you want to submit a pull-request, please, install the clang format
pre-commit hook that lints code.

1. The standard conda environment includes the required clang-format libraries.
If the conda environment is *not* being used, a clang-format library will need
to manually installed. (For example, using Homebrew on macOS:
`brew install clang-format`.)

2. The linter will need to know where to find the `clang-format-diff.py` file, so
`CLANG_FORMAT_DIFF` must be exported. On a standard conda installation:
`export CLANG_FORMAT_DIFF=$(find ~/miniconda3/pkgs -name clang-format-diff.py)`

3. Install the pre-commit hook: `./scripts/git-pre-commit-format install`

## Testing

### Unit tests

When built for any one of the desktop platforms, this project will also generate
a suite of unit tests.

The tests are built by default.

```bash
cmake --build build -j $(nproc)
```

Once built, you can run them with `ctest` as follows:

```
ctest --test-dir build -j $(nproc) --output-on-failure
```

### Running the functional tests

**New build required**: Functional tests require a dummy build of the application, which is not
built by default. To build the `dummyvpn` target, in the root folder of this repository run:

```
cmake --build build -j$(nproc) --target dummyvpn
```

This will create a dummy build under the `tests/dummyvpn` folder. To run the functional
tests against this build, make sure the `MVPN_BIN` environment variable is set:

```
export MVPN_BIN=$(pwd)/build/tests/dummyvpn/dummyvpn
```

**Other dependencies**:
* Install node (if needed) and then `npm install` to install the testing
  dependencies
* Make a .env file and place it in the root folder for the repo. It should include:
 * `MVPN_BIN` (location of compiled mvpn binary. This must be a dummy binary, see note above.)
 * `ARTIFACT_DIR` - optional (directory to put screenshots from test failures)
 * Sample .env file:
  ```
  export PATH=$PATH:~/Qt/6.6.3/macos/bin:$PATH
  export QT_MACOS_BIN=~/Qt/6.6.3/macos/bin
  MVPN_API_BASE_URL=http://localhost:5000
  MVPN_BIN=dummybuild/src/mozillavpn
  ARTIFACT_DIR=tests/artifact
  ```

**To run a test**: from the root of the project: `npm run functionalTest path/to/testFile.js`. To run, say, the authentication tests: `npm run functionalTest tests/functional/testAuthenticationInApp.js`.

## Developer Options and staging environment

To enable the staging environment, open the `Help` window, and click on the
`Help` title text 6 times within 10 seconds to unlock the Developer Options menu.
On this menu, you can enable on the `Staging Server` checkbox to switch to the
staging environment. A full restart of the VPN will be required for this option
to take effect.

## Glean

[Glean](https://docs.telemetry.mozilla.org/concepts/glean/glean.html) is a
Mozilla analytics & telemetry solution that provides a consistent
experience and behavior across all of Mozilla products.

When the client is in staging mode, pings will have the app channel set to
`staging`. This allows for filtering between staging and production pings through the
`client_info.app_channel` metric present in all pings.

[app-channel]: https://mozilla.github.io/glean/book/reference/general/initializing.html?highlight=app%20channel#gleaninitializeconfiguration

### Debug tooling

Glean provides a series of debug APIs debug-apis to aid developers and testers
in verifying Glean metrics.

These APIs can be accessed through the Mozilla VPN developer menu, under "Telemetry Debugging".

#### Data review

If you are responsible for a piece of work that adds new Glean instrumentation you will need to do a data review.
Following is the recommended process along with some pointers.

The data review process is also described here: https://wiki.mozilla.org/Data_Collection

The basic process is this:

* Implement the new instrumentation. Refer to [the Glean book](https://mozilla.github.io/glean/book/user/metrics/adding-new-metrics.html) on how to do that.
* When adding or updating new metrics or pings, the [Glean YAML files](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/tree/main/glean) might need to be updated.
  When that is the case a new data-review must be requested and added to the list of data-reviews for the updated/added instrumentation.
  When updating data-review links on the YAML files, these are the things to keep in mind:
  * Include a link to the *GitHub* bug that describes the work, this must be a public link;
  * Put "TBD" in the `data_reviews` entry, that needs to be updated *before* releasing the new instrumentation and ideally before merging it;
  * Think about whether the data you are collecting is technical or interaction, sometimes it's both. In that case pick interaction which is a higher category of data. (See more details on https://wiki.mozilla.org/Data_Collection);
* Open a **draft** PR on GitHub;
* Fill out the data-review[^1] form and request a data-review from one of the [Mozilla Data Stewards](https://wiki.mozilla.org/Data_Collection)[^2].
  That can be done by opening a Bugzilla ticket or more easily by attaching the questionnaire as a comment on the PR that implements the instrumentation changes.
  For Bugzilla, there is a special Bugzilla data review request option and for GitHub it's enough to add the chosen data steward as a reviewer for the PR.
* The data-review questionnaire will result in a data review response. The link to that response is what should be added to the `data_review` entry on the Glean YAML files.
  It must be a public link.

 Note:
 - It is **ok** for a reviewer to review and approve your code while you're waiting for data review.
 - It is **not** ok to release code that contains instrumentation changes without a data review r+. It is good practice not to merge code that does not have a data review r+.

[^1]: The data-review questionnaire can be found at https://github.com/mozilla/data-review/blob/main/request.md. That can be copy pasted and filled out manually. However,
since the VPN application uses Glean for data collection developers can also use the [`glean_parser data-review`](https://mozilla.github.io/glean_parser/) command,
which generates a mostly filled out data-review questionnaire for Glean users. The questionnaire can seem quite intimidating, but don't panic.
First, look at an old data-review such as https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/pull/4594.
Questions 1, 2, 3 an 10 are the ones that require most of your attention and thought.
If you don't know the answers to these questions, reach out to Sarah Bird or the product manager so you can answer these with full confidence.
[^2]: Feel free to ping any of the data-stewards. If the collection is time sensitive consider pinging all data-stewards directly on the [data-stewards](https://matrix.to/#/#data-stewards:mozilla.org) matrix channel.

## Status

[![Unit Tests](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/test_unit.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/test_unit.yaml)
[![Lottie Tests](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/test_lottie.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/test_lottie.yaml)
[![Linters (clang, l10n)](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/linters.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/linters.yaml)
[![Linux Packages](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/linux.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/linux.yaml)
[![WebAssembly](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/wasm.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/wasm.yaml)

Commit message:

Remove the dummyvpn target (#9813)
* Remove the dummyvpn target
* Remove MZ_DUMMY macro
* Update functional testing instructions
* Fix splitTunnel feature check for unit testing

docs/index.mdx, after:

---
title: Mozilla VPN
sidebar_label: Overview
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /
hide_table_of_contents: false
---



_One tap to privacy
Surf, stream, game, and get work done while maintaining your privacy online.
Whether you’re traveling, using public WiFi, or simply looking for more online
security, we will always put your privacy first._

See: https://vpn.mozilla.org

export const Grid = ({children}) => (
  <span
    style={{
      display: "grid",
      gridTemplateColumns: "2fr 1fr",
      gridColumnGap: "20px",
    }}>
    {children}
  </span>
);
export const Preview = ({children}) =>(<iframe
    src="https://firefox-ci-tc.services.mozilla.com/api/index/v1/task/mozillavpn.v2.mozilla-vpn-client.branch.main.latest.build.wasm/artifacts/public%2Fbuild%2Fembedded.html"
    style={{
      width: "390px",
      height: "670px",
      border: "15px solid black",
      borderRadius: "20px",
      gridColumn: 2,
      gridRow: 1,
      gridRowEnd: "auto",
      gridRowEnd: 1000,
    }}
  />
);

<Grid>
  <div>
  ## Getting Involved
  We encourage you to participate in this open source project. We love Pull
  Requests, Bug Reports, ideas, (security) code reviews, or any other kind of
  positive contribution.

  Before you attempt to make a contribution please read the [Community
  Participation
  Guidelines](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/about/governance/policies/participation/).

  Here are some useful links to start:

  * [View open
    issues](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/issues)
  * [View open pull
    requests](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/pulls)
  * [File an
    issue](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/issues/new/choose)
  * [File a security
    issue](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/enter_bug.cgi?product=Mozilla%20VPN)
  * Join the [matrix
    channel](https://chat.mozilla.org/#/room/#mozilla-vpn:mozilla.org)
  * [View the wiki](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/wiki)
  * [View the support
    docs](https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/products/firefox-private-network-vpn)
  * Localization happens on
    [Pontoon](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/projects/mozilla-vpn-client/).
  </div>
  <Preview></Preview>

</Grid>



## Building the Client

Moved here - [Dev-Setup](Building/index.md)

### Pre-commit formatting hook

If you want to submit a pull-request, please, install the clang format
pre-commit hook that lints code.

1. The standard conda environment includes the required clang-format libraries.
If the conda environment is *not* being used, a clang-format library will need
to manually installed. (For example, using Homebrew on macOS:
`brew install clang-format`.)

2. The linter will need to know where to find the `clang-format-diff.py` file, so
`CLANG_FORMAT_DIFF` must be exported. On a standard conda installation:
`export CLANG_FORMAT_DIFF=$(find ~/miniconda3/pkgs -name clang-format-diff.py)`

3. Install the pre-commit hook: `./scripts/git-pre-commit-format install`

## Testing

### Unit tests

When built for any one of the desktop platforms, this project will also generate
a suite of unit tests.

The tests are built by default.

```bash
cmake --build build -j $(nproc)
```

Once built, you can run them with `ctest` as follows:

```
ctest --test-dir build -j $(nproc) --output-on-failure
```

### Running the functional tests

Functional tests can be run against the production build of the application by providing the
`--testing` flag to the command line. This option switches the client in to staging mode, and
enables mocking for platform and backend features necessary to facilitate automated testing.

To run the tests, we must set the `MVPN_BIN` environment variable and point it to the Mozilla
VPN binary.

```
export MVPN_BIN=$(pwd)/build/src/mozillavpn
```

The functional tests also require the testing addons to be built. This sub project can be found
at `tests/functional/addons` and can be built as follows:

```
cmake -B build-addons/ -S tests/functional/addons
cmake --build build-addons/
export MVPN_ADDONS_PATH=build-addons/
```

**Other dependencies**:
* Install node (if needed) and then `npm install` to install the testing
  dependencies
* Make a .env file and place it in the root folder for the repo. It should include:
 * `MVPN_BIN` (location of compiled mvpn binary. This must be a VPN binary, see note above.)
 * `MVPN_ADDONS_PATH` (location of the compiled test addons project)
 * `ARTIFACT_DIR` - optional (directory to put screenshots from test failures)
 * Sample .env file:
  ```
  export PATH=$PATH:~/Qt/6.6.3/macos/bin:$PATH
  export QT_MACOS_BIN=~/Qt/6.6.3/macos/bin
  MVPN_API_BASE_URL=http://localhost:5000
  MVPN_BIN=build/src/mozillavpn
  MVPN_ADDONS_PATH=build-addons/
  ARTIFACT_DIR=tests/artifact
  ```

**To run a test**: from the root of the project: `npm run functionalTest path/to/testFile.js`. To run, say, the authentication tests: `npm run functionalTest tests/functional/testAuthenticationInApp.js`.

## Developer Options and staging environment

To enable the staging environment, open the `Help` window, and click on the
`Help` title text 6 times within 10 seconds to unlock the Developer Options menu.
On this menu, you can enable on the `Staging Server` checkbox to switch to the
staging environment. A full restart of the VPN will be required for this option
to take effect.

## Glean

[Glean](https://docs.telemetry.mozilla.org/concepts/glean/glean.html) is a
Mozilla analytics & telemetry solution that provides a consistent
experience and behavior across all of Mozilla products.

When the client is in staging mode, pings will have the app channel set to
`staging`. This allows for filtering between staging and production pings through the
`client_info.app_channel` metric present in all pings.

[app-channel]: https://mozilla.github.io/glean/book/reference/general/initializing.html?highlight=app%20channel#gleaninitializeconfiguration

### Debug tooling

Glean provides a series of debug APIs debug-apis to aid developers and testers
in verifying Glean metrics.

These APIs can be accessed through the Mozilla VPN developer menu, under "Telemetry Debugging".

#### Data review

If you are responsible for a piece of work that adds new Glean instrumentation you will need to do a data review.
Following is the recommended process along with some pointers.

The data review process is also described here: https://wiki.mozilla.org/Data_Collection

The basic process is this:

* Implement the new instrumentation. Refer to [the Glean book](https://mozilla.github.io/glean/book/user/metrics/adding-new-metrics.html) on how to do that.
* When adding or updating new metrics or pings, the [Glean YAML files](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/tree/main/glean) might need to be updated.
  When that is the case a new data-review must be requested and added to the list of data-reviews for the updated/added instrumentation.
  When updating data-review links on the YAML files, these are the things to keep in mind:
  * Include a link to the *GitHub* bug that describes the work, this must be a public link;
  * Put "TBD" in the `data_reviews` entry, that needs to be updated *before* releasing the new instrumentation and ideally before merging it;
  * Think about whether the data you are collecting is technical or interaction, sometimes it's both. In that case pick interaction which is a higher category of data. (See more details on https://wiki.mozilla.org/Data_Collection);
* Open a **draft** PR on GitHub;
* Fill out the data-review[^1] form and request a data-review from one of the [Mozilla Data Stewards](https://wiki.mozilla.org/Data_Collection)[^2].
  That can be done by opening a Bugzilla ticket or more easily by attaching the questionnaire as a comment on the PR that implements the instrumentation changes.
  For Bugzilla, there is a special Bugzilla data review request option and for GitHub it's enough to add the chosen data steward as a reviewer for the PR.
* The data-review questionnaire will result in a data review response. The link to that response is what should be added to the `data_review` entry on the Glean YAML files.
  It must be a public link.

 Note:
 - It is **ok** for a reviewer to review and approve your code while you're waiting for data review.
 - It is **not** ok to release code that contains instrumentation changes without a data review r+. It is good practice not to merge code that does not have a data review r+.

[^1]: The data-review questionnaire can be found at https://github.com/mozilla/data-review/blob/main/request.md. That can be copy pasted and filled out manually. However,
since the VPN application uses Glean for data collection developers can also use the [`glean_parser data-review`](https://mozilla.github.io/glean_parser/) command,
which generates a mostly filled out data-review questionnaire for Glean users. The questionnaire can seem quite intimidating, but don't panic.
First, look at an old data-review such as https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/pull/4594.
Questions 1, 2, 3 an 10 are the ones that require most of your attention and thought.
If you don't know the answers to these questions, reach out to Sarah Bird or the product manager so you can answer these with full confidence.
[^2]: Feel free to ping any of the data-stewards. If the collection is time sensitive consider pinging all data-stewards directly on the [data-stewards](https://matrix.to/#/#data-stewards:mozilla.org) matrix channel.

## Status

[![Unit Tests](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/test_unit.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/test_unit.yaml)
[![Lottie Tests](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/test_lottie.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/test_lottie.yaml)
[![Linters (clang, l10n)](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/linters.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/linters.yaml)
[![Linux Packages](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/linux.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/linux.yaml)
[![WebAssembly](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/wasm.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/mozilla-vpn-client/actions/workflows/wasm.yaml)
